------------
DOCS README
------------

This file contains notes for developers on how to edit and install
files in the docs subdirectory.  The toolkit docs are handled
differently from the rest of the source code.

Briefly, we keep both source and generated doc files in the svn tree.
In some cases (manual), building the doc files from source requires
tools (latex) outside the normal build procedure.  In that case,
'make' doesn't regenerate the doc files, and 'make install' merely
copies the files into the install tree.

------------------------------------
Manual directory, tex and pdf files
------------------------------------

The HPCToolkit User's Manual is kept in Latex in the doc/manual
directory.  To update the manual, edit the .tex file(s) and then
regenerate the manual using Makefile.latex:

   make -f Makefile.latex

Note that you run make from the doc/manual source directory.
Use either no target or target 'all'.

-----------------------------
WWW directory and html files
-----------------------------

To edit the www/html files in the svn source tree:

1. Svn checkout and configure as usual.  If you're using this sandbox
only to edit doc files, then you can omit the --with-externals option.

2. In the source doc/www directory, edit the *.html.in files.  Just
use a regular text editor (eg, emacs in html mode) and follow the
style that's there.

3. From the *build* directory, eg, build/doc/www, run 'make'.  This
will remake the *.html files back in the source directory.  You can
check this with svn stat or diff.  There should be corresponding diffs
in both the html.in and html files.

4. Still in the build/doc/www directory, run 'make install'.  This
installs a copy of the html files into install/share/doc/hpctoolkit/.

5. View the new files by opening a web browser on index.html in the
*install* directory: install/share/doc/hpctoolkit/index.html.

6. When you're satisfied with your edits, then 'svn commit' from the
svn source tree.

Note: always edit the html.in files (source directory) and run make
from the build directory.  If you're only editing doc files, you may
find it more convenient to run ./configure in place, that is, not use
a separate build directory.

To install the www/html files to the hpctoolkit.org web site:

1. Configure, make and make install as above.

2. The html files for hpctoolkit.org are on orion/carme in:

   /net/www1/sites/hpctoolkit/htdocs/hpctoolkit/

Tar-copy the share/doc/hpctoolkit *install* directory into the live
web site on orion or carme with:

   cd install/share/doc
   tar cf hpctk.tar hpctoolkit

   on orion/carme ...
   cd /net/www1/sites/hpctoolkit/htdocs
   tar xf hpctk.tar
   (ignore 'Cannot utime: Operation not permitted' errors)

3. Go to http://hpctoolkit.org/, click a few links and make sure that
you haven't broken anything.

Note: do NOT try moving the old htdocs/hpctoolkit directory and then
creating a new one from scratch.  There are files in the old directory
that are not in the tar file and you would lose those files.

Note: you will likely need to tar-copy the files instead of manually
cp-ing them.  The htdocs/hpctoolkit directory is group writable, but
unless you're the last one to install a given file, you probably don't
have write permission for individual files.  But tar will delete the
old file and install a new one (with you as owner).

